“This book opens the door to the world, which most of us don’t know. It is an obligatory reading for all those, who want to understand the world of silence, the world of the Deaf,” this is how Adrianna Glegoła, a doctoral candidate at the UW’s Doctoral School of Humanities and a Polish Sign Language Philology student, described the book “Deaf” by Anna Goc in the episode of the “Read with the UW”.Anna Glegoła graduated from the Jagiellonian University in Kraków. She specialises in the English and Russian languages. Glegoła completed postgraduate studies in audio-visual translations. She gained international experience during student exchange in Russia, Italy and the USA. She is a two-time laureate of the international translation competition. In 2023, Adrianna Glegoła started her doctoral studies at the Doctoral School of Humanities of the University of Warsaw. At the same time, she continues her education studying Polish Sign Language Philology at the UW – the only programme of this kind offered in Poland. D like Deaf“Deaf  is a story of a community ignored by the system. Because of deafness and unfamiliarity with the Polish language, its members were deprived of the right to decide about themselves,” says Anna Glegoła, a doctoral candidate from the Doctoral School of Humanities and Polish Sign Language Philology student. In her book, Anna Goc, a journalist of “Tygodnik Powszechny” and laureate of the Ryszard Kapuściński Award, gave voice to the Deaf people. The book opens the door to the world of the Deaf. One can learn from it that the Deaf are disabled only among people who can hear. Between each other, the Deaf can use their own language and do not see themselves as others. Deaf people use to say that “deafness is not a disease or a disability, and ask to address their community with capital D – Deaf”.  Language of Deaf“The Deaf do not need to know how to write or read in Polish – it is a foreign language for them. Their first natural language is PJM, Polish Sign Language,” Adrianna Glegoła emphasises. “There are, in fact, Deaf people in Poland, who do not know Polish. They can’t speak or read in Polish, although they graduated from the schools for the Deaf,” one learns from the book. “From Anna Goc’s book, we find out that there is no universal sign language and not every Deaf person can learn Polish. For many, it is simply impossible,” Adrianna Glegoła explains and underlines the important role of sign language interpreters. True stories described in the book, like a Deaf married couple who cannot call an ambulance to a sick child or a Deaf pregnant woman whose little son (nobody else knows sign language) needs to tell her that a newborn baby could not be saved, are truly moving and devastating. It is a reporter’s account of specific stories backed up by a substantial knowledge of the Deaf world and language. “Deaf  is a very important and needed book, which features the reality of the Deaf community. It tells the stories of Deaf children of hearing parents, hearing children of Deaf parents (CODA), education of the Deaf, the difference between Polish Sign Language and a sign language system, but foremost of the lack of understanding and exclusion,” Adrianna Glegoła says and adds: “This is not an easy reading, but I definitely recommend to reach for it”. The book Deaf by Anna Goc can be found at the University of Warsaw Library in free access in the “Social Science” section and at the library of the Faculty of Polish Studies. Polish Sign Language is a visual-spatial language used in every day communication of the Deaf community in Poland. It is not a visual representation of the phonic Polish language, because it varies from it when it comes to vocabulary and grammar. It was developed around 200 years ago, when the first school for Deaf people was opened in Warsaw. Besides the University of Warsaw, there is no organised teaching of Polish Sign Language on the academic level in Poland. The Polish Sign Language Philology is a study programme opened at the UW’s Faculty of Polish Studies in October 2019. There is also a possibility to take a Polish Sign Language course, just like those in phonic languages.

Prof. Alojzy Z. Nowak was re-elected by the Electoral College of the University of Warsaw for a second term as the Rector of the University of Warsaw on 18th April, having received 281 electoral votes.There were three official candidates running in the election, where 435 votes were cast in total, with 432 being declared valid. Prof. Alojzy Z. Nowak received 281 votes, Prof. Łukasz Niesiołowski-Spanò received 143, and Prof. Maciej Górecki received 8. Prof. Alojzy Z. Nowak has been affiliated to the University of Warsaw since 1984. He has held a number of leadership roles including as head of the Academic Subunit for International Economics and the Academic Unit for Economics at the Faculty of Management. He also served as Director of the European Centre. Between 1999 and 2006, Prof. Nowak was Vice-Dean of the Faculty of Management, and was the Dean of the Faculty for the 2006-2012 term. During the subsequent four-year period, he held the position of Vice-Rector responsible for research and cooperation. In 2016, he was re-elected as Dean of the Faculty of Management. During his academic career, he has delivered lectures at universities in France, the UK, the USA, Russia, China and Korea. His first term as Rector of the University of Warsaw started in 2020. Election proceduresThe rector of the University is elected by the Electoral College. Members of the College represent each group of the University community, which includes academics, administration staff, doctoral candidates and students. Independently, the electors are chosen from individual groups of the academic community in elections at every faculty or constituency. Candidates for the position of rector are nominated by the University Council and the electors in a secret ballot. On 6th March, the Electoral College indicated four candidates: Prof. Maciej Górecki, Prof. Łukasz Niesiołowski-Spanò, Prof. Alojzy Z. Nowak, and Prof. Sławomir Żółtek. The University Council nominated Prof. Alojzy Z. Nowak. The final three candidates, Prof. Maciej Górecki, Prof. Łukasz Niesiołowski-Spanò, and Prof. Alojzy Z. Nowak agreed to stand in the elections. Subsequently, the UW Senate assessed their candidatures. Prof. Alojzy Z. Nowak was the only candidate to receive a positive opinion from the Senate. The election was held on 18th April in the Auditorium Maximum, at the UW campus on Krakowskie Przedmieście. On the same day, the electors also elected members of the UW Senate for the 2024–2028 term.

While analysing a vast amount of data collected by the European Space Agency’s star surveyor Gaia, a research team including UW scientists has discovered a “sleeping” black hole. Its mass is estimated to be nearly thirty-three times the mass of the Sun, making it the greatest known example of this black hole in our galaxy. The discovery can influence the understanding of how massive stars evolve.The majority of the few known black holes of stellar origin (resulting from the collapse of a massive star at the end of its life) have been identified in X-ray binaries. In these binaries, the X-ray emission is due to the matter lost by the star orbiting a black hole when it is sucked into the black hole. When the black hole does not have a companion close enough to steal matter from it, it does not emit any radiation, hence the extreme difficulty in detecting them. On 16th April, the team of space mission Gaia announced in Astronomy & Astrophysics Letter the discovery of the third dormant black hole. This happened by accident when scientists were proving the data for the publication of the next Gaia catalogue. The team responsible for the discovery was the Black Hole Task Force. The lead author of the paper is Dr Pasquale Panuzzo from the Paris Observatory in France. The research team included also the scientists from the Astronomical Observatory, the University of Warsaw. The team has examined an old star in the constellation Aquila, located at 1926 light years from the Earth. While analysing the star movement, the researchers discovered a surprising phenomenon. The star was orbiting with a dormant black hole, whose mass was around thirty three times greater than the Sun’s. Galactic orbit of the Gaia BH3 system. Credits: ESA/Gaia/DPAC. License: CC BY-SA 3.0 IGO The unexpectedly massive black hole was named Gaia BH3, because it was already the third dormant black hole discovered by the Gaia mission. Typical masses of black holes of stellar origin known in our galaxy are ten times greater than the mass of the Sun. The most massive example known to date is the black hole found in the X-ray binary system of the Cygnus constellation (Cyg X-1), whose mass is estimated to be around twenty times greater than the Sun’s.Gaia BH3 is a real unicorn. This sort of discovery is made once in a lifetime. The existence of such massive stellar black holes has so far only been suggested by the detection of gravitational waves from systems in other galaxies,” Dr Panuzzo emphasised.The quality of the data from the Gaia mission enabled the scientists to determine the mass of the black hole more precisely than ever before. The picture presents Gaia’s black holes at their positions in the sky. These black holes are also the closest ones to Earth that we know of. The sky map in the background shows Gaia’s sky in colours and is not a picture. It is a visualisation where individual stars with their colours as observed by Gaia are plotted one by one. Credits: ESA/Gaia/DPAC. License: CC BY-SA 3.0 IGOWith a mass of thirty times greater than the Sun’s, we observe the results typical for black holes detected in distant galaxies via the experiments of gravitational waves. The surveys of the Gaia give us the first undoubtful prove for existing such heavy black holes,” said Prof. Łukasz Wyrzykowski from the UW’s Astronomical Observatory, a Gaia team member from 2008. The UW researcher belongs also to the Black Hole Task Force.Intriguing companionThe star orbiting the Gaia BH3 is also unusual. It is a an old star in the Galactic stellar halo, which is orbiting in the opposite direction with respect to the stars of the Galactic disk. Its kinematic characteristics indicate that this star was part of a small galaxy that merged into the Milky Way over eight billion years ago. Moreover, the accompanying star is also very poor in elements heavier than the lightest, hydrogen and helium, allowing the researchers to deduce that the progenitor of this high-mass black hole was a massive star, also very poor in heavy elements.Surprisingly, the chemical composition of the companion is similar to that found in old, metal-deficient stars in the Galaxy,” explained Dr Milena Ratajczak from the UW’s Astronomical Observatory, a member of the Gaia consortium.This observation confirms, for the first time, the hypothesis of certain models of stellar evolution which suggest that the high-mass black holes observed via gravitational waves were produced by the gravitational collapse of massive stars poor in heavy elements. These early stars could evolve differently than the large ones we are observing in our galaxy. Comparison of the orbits of Gaia’s black holes (red orbit, black dot) and their companion stars (blue orbit, yellow dot). Credits: ESA/Gaia/DPAC. License: CC BY-SA 3.0 IGOWhat next?The question of how massive stars evolve and form black holes is still not fully resolved. However, the discovery of the Gaia BH3 system will undoubtedly be the subject of further research in this area. For now, it is only a preview of the full findings from Gaia, which are planned to be published in 2026. Details of the publicationThe article “Discovery of a dormant 33 solar-mass black hole in pre-release Gaia astrometry” by the Gaia Collaboration, P. Panuzzo, et al. was published in Astronomy & Astrophysics Letters.

The researchers from the Astronomical Observatory of the University of Warsaw discovered the classical Cepheid with the longest pulsation period known in our Galaxy. This variable star is called OGLE-GD-CEP-1884, and is likely the most luminous, youngest, and most massive Cepheid known in the Milky Way.The newly discovered classical Cepheid in the Galaxy, named OGLE-GD-CEP-1884, can be categorised as the first ultra-long-period Cepheid in the Milky Way. The period of 78.14 days is nearly ten days longer than that of the previous record-holding Cepheid, S Vulpeculae. This star is present in the ASAS-SN and Gaia DR3 catalogs of variable stars, yet it has been classified as a long-period variable. Based on more than ten years of the photometric monitoring of this star conducted by the OGLE project in the I and V bands and a radial velocity curve from the Gaia Focused Product Release, the researchers unequivocally demonstrated that this object is a fundamental-mode classical Cepheid. By employing the mid-infrared period–luminosity relation, they managed to determine the distance to OGLE-GD-CEP-1884 (4.47 ± 0.34 kpc) and place it on the Milky Way map, along with about 2400 other classical Cepheids. Although it was overlooked in the existing catalogs of Cepheids, the researchers point out that OGLE-GD-CEP-1884 is quite a bright star in the sky, especially at longer wavelengths. In addition, there might be more such long-period classical Cepheids in the Galaxy that remain undetected, and the Milky Way does not differ in the number of long-period Cepheids compared to other galaxies. The fact that this star was misclassified as an LPV in the ASAS-SN and Gaia catalogs indicates the need for continuous improvement of algorithms for the automated classification of variable stars. For now, traditional visual inspection of light curves remains the most reliable method for classifying variable stars. 3D map of the Milky WayThe OGLE research team, led by Prof. Andrzej Udalski, has been investigating the pulsating supergiant Cepheids for years. Thus, nearly half of the discovered classical Cepheids of the Milky Way has been discovered by the astronomers from the Astronomical Observatory of the University of Warsaw. In 2019, the researchers led by Prof. Dorota Skowron presented a unique three-dimensional map of the Milky Way, which provides insights into the structure and history of our Galaxy. The map demonstrates that the Milky Way disk is not flat, it is warped at distances greater than 25,000 light years from the Galactic centre. More about the 3D map can be found on the UW website >>Publication details:I. Soszyński, D. M. Skowron, A. Udalski, P. Pietrukowicz, M. Gromadzki, M. K. Szymański, J. Skowron, P. Mróz, R. Poleski, S. Kozłowski, P. Iwanek, M. Wrona, K. Ulaczyk, K. Rybicki, and M. Mróz, “Discovery of the Longest-period Classical Cepheid in the Milky Way”, The Astronomical Journal Letters, 965:L17 (2024): https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/2041-8213/ad392f

On 9th April, the speaker of the Seimas Viktorija Čmilytė-Nielsen visited the University of Warsaw Library. The Lithuanian delegation met the authorities of the UW and UW students of Baltic Philology.On 9th April, Viktorija Čmilytė-Nielsen, the speaker of the Seimas of the Republic of Lithuania, visited the University of Warsaw Library. Accompanied by the UW Rector Prof. Alojzy Z. Nowak and UW Chancellor Robert Grey, she had an opportunity to sightsee the interior of the library and the exhibition inspired by Marek Hłasko’s life and work. During the visit of the Lithuanian delegation, the most meaningful information about the UW Library, digitalisation of its collections as well as student experiences was discussed. In the UW Gardens, Viktorija Čmilytė-Nielsen also met students of the Department of General Linguistics, Sign Linguistics and Baltic Studies of the University of Warsaw. Viktorija Čmilytė-Nielsen graduated from the University of Latvia, majoring in English Philology. Awarded the title Grandmaster by FIDE in 2010, she was a European women’s champion in 2011, and is a two-time Lithuanian champion. She entered politics in 2015 and was elected in 2016 parliamentary election. In 2019, she became the Seimas opposition leader.